# Check-in 1
**Date:** October 24, 2025

## Prior Feedback
- Our prior feedback included reccomendations on the software to use to aslign our reads, so we made sure to implement using Salmon for alignment and generating transcripts per million.
- We also discussed identifying some new genes enriched in certain developmental stages of the germline, which we will implement in future analysis.

## New Progress
- So far, we have downloaded the raw sequencing reads for a single worm in 7 different germline developmental stages to assess differntial expression of genes in each stage. The stages are:
1. Mitotic
2. Pachytene
3. Diplotene
4. Diakinesis
5. -2 oocyte
6. -1 oocyte
7. Zygote
- We also downloaded the c. elegans transcriptome. This was a little complicated because the authors were unclear about which transciptome they used and only mentioned the genome. We orginally performed the analysis using the genome reference but after aligning with salmon failed, we realized we had to find the transcriptome. The README has been updated with the correct transcriptome.
- We used trim-galore to trim off adapters and filter for quality based on what the authors performed with quality of >=10 and length >35bp.
- We then used salmon index to index the transcriptome.
- Finally, we used salmon quant to align the reads to the transcriptome and generate our transcripts per million counts.

## Next steps
- Next we will begin generating a UMAP and performing differential expression analysis.

## Project organization
Directory organization:
- Scripts in worm_development/analysis
- Raw data in worm_development/data/rawdata
- Processed data in worm_development/data/processeddata
- transcript and index in worm_development/index
- check ins in worm_development/doc

Workload distribution:
- For our project, we each perform the analyses individually, but we do it together so we can make sure we are both getting the experience and learning how to do the analyses and can be there to help each other when needed.

## Struggles and Questions
- The paper mentions they filtered out genes relating to "mitochondrial, ribosomal, sperm associated, intestine associated, or stress associated based previous publications". However, they fail to mention how they filtered these out and do not provide a list of these genes. They do provide literature that identifies these genes, but it is unclear what exactly we are to look for. **How should identify these genes, how do we filter them out from our TPM counts, and is it necessary to filter them out assuming they will cluster away from the germline genes?**
- After the filtering step, we plan to use monocle3 for anlaysis. Does this use the quant.sf file salmon generated or will there be other files we need to input?
